DNS Components

Name Server
    - Load up our DNS settings and configs and answers any questions from Clients or other servers.
    - if it doesn't know the answer it redirects
    - can be authoritive or recursive
Zone File-
    Either the information about the Domain OR
    How to get it
Resource Records
    A zone file is made up of these and each line is a record and contains info about the hosts
    - Includes:
        Record Name
        TTL: time after which we discard the record and obtain a new one
        Class: Namespace of the record information 
            Most commonly IN for internet
        Type: Type of info stored in record data
            A Record
            MX Record
            PTR Record
            CNAME
            NS Record
            HINFO Record
            ISDN Record
            SOA Record
        Data: IP if its an A record or something else if it was something else

DNS Process:
    1. Host asks local DNS where is domain "domainnam.com"
    2. Local DNS server asks the Root Servers by talking to a recursive DNS server provided by the ISP
    3. One of 13 root servers (or a mirrored version of it) asks the .com Top-Level Domain DNS server at an IP address it gives us
    4. We send new request to Top-Level Domain name server. If the TLD server doesn't have "domain.com" in its zone file it will find the Name server that does and send us the IP of that name server
    5. Send final request to Authoritative DNS server with the record we want which has the zone file and a resource record for www of this host so it sends us the IP address

DNS Setup -- where to find info on how to set up a DNS server
    BIND: Most popular DNS Server on the Internet
    DNSmasq: Lightweight and easier to configure than BIND, recommended for smaller network
    PowerDNS: Full Featured like BIND with more flexibility. Reads info from mulitple databases like MySQL, PostgreSQL etc. 

DNS tools:
    nslookup [hostname] : query nae servers to find info about resource records
    dig: tool to get info about DNS name servers, more flexible than NS lookup

DEFINITIONS
authoritive name server, holds DNS records
recursive name server, would ask other servers who would ask other servers until they found the authoritive..can also have the information cached
Zone file, how the name server stores information about the domain or how to get to the domain if it doesn't know
A Record, maps a domain name to the IP address of the computer hosting the domain...used to find IP address of a computer connected to the internet from a name
NS Record, Used to delegate a subdomian to a set of name servers...indicates which name servers are authorative for the zone/domain
PTR record, reverse DNS lookup...uses IP address to get a hostname/domain
CNAME, Cononical Name record used to specify that a domain name is an alias for another domain. If resolver finds CNAME then it will restart query with the CNAME
MX record, mail exchanger record...resource record in the DNS that specifies a mail server responsible for accepting email messages on behalf of the recipients domain
AAAA record, IPv6 record for a given host with a different type of IP address (quad A)
etc/hosts, contains mappings of some hostnames to IP addresses
etc/resolv.conf, maps DNS name servers for more efficient lookups
Host Information Record (HINFO), used to acquire general info about a host. Specifies OS and CPU type. Defines possibility of using system specific protocols when two hosts want to communicate. Not typically used on public servers
ISDN Record, Integrated services digital network record specifies ISDN address for a host. A telephone number with country code..a national destination code...a ISDN subscriber number and a ISDN subaddress (variation of the A Resource)
SOA Record, State of Auhority record specifies information about DNS zone including primary name server..email of domain admin...domain serial number and several timers
