Redundant Array of Inexpensive Disks – purpose is to combine multiple cheap drives to make high capacity single drive and give failover tolerance by adding redundancy

RAID Levels/modes = method the drives are ganged together
RAID 0 – faster performance ..distributes data across multiple drives for increased read and write speeds called STRIPING .. no protection against drive failure because it doesn’t duplicate information. Ideal for non-critical storage of data that have to be read or written at high speed like retouching or video editing 

RAID 1 – writes and reads the same data to pairs of drives – MIRRORING, easiest method of failover disk storage, can increase read speeds by fetching alternately from each drive. DISADVANTAGE – costs 50% of available storage capacity. Ideal for mission critical storage like in accounting

RAID 2 – bit level striping with dedicated Hamming code parity.

RAID 3 – byte level striping with dedicated parity..each sequential byte is on a different drive

RAID 4 – block level striping with dedicated parity – has I/O parrallelism meaning better performance

RAID -DP – replaced RAID-4 with two parity disks

RAID 5 – Block level striping and writes and reads from multiple disks and distributes parity data across all disks, uses 1/3 of available disk capacity for parity and needs at least 3 disks and up to 16. Parity written to one drive. Striping with Parity. Parity is spread across all drives. Used with memory cache to improve read.  Most common secure RAID. Read calculations are fast while writes can be slower due to parity. DISADVANTAGE – Failures effect throughput, if large one fails rebuild time may take a day or so and a second fail may cause data loss
Ideal use:  efficient storage with excellent security and decent performance. Ideal for file and application servers that have a limited number of drives.

Parity data – small amount of data derived mathematically from a larger set that describes larger set

RAID 6 – Striping with double parity. Parity written to two drives, needs 4 drives and can handle two dieing at once. Can survive secondary failure of drives. Reads are very fast, still have access to data with drive failure. – DISADVANTAGES – write slower than RAID 5 (20%), needs more drives, drive failures have effect on throughput. Ideal use: Excellent security, efficient storage and decent performance..preferable to RAID 5 in file and application servers

RAID 10 or RAID 1+ - nested hybrid RAID configuration that provides security via mirroring and striping across each set. Rebuild time is fast if failures occur because mirrored drive just needs to be copied. DISADVANTAGE – half of storage capacity goes to mirroring...so expensive
